All right, so in the previous video,
we saw that through the modifiers, public, private,
and no modifier, are very straightforward.
The protected access modifier though, is ripe
for tricky exam questions.
We are going to be talking more about the protected modifier
when we delve into into inheritance further.
This section wouldn't be complete though
if we didn't talk about overriding a little bit here,
although overriding is part of the inheritance section.
There are different rules to which access modifiers
are allowable based on the inherited elements.
You can override a parent's attribute,
creating an attribute on the child class,
with the same name and type as the parent.
This is called attribute hiding because you are hiding
the parent's attribute with the child's.
A child's attribute can be more restrictive
or less restrictive than the parent's.
There are no invalid combinations.
Let's explore a couple of these variations in code now.
All right, so we're starting out in encapsulation project.
We're gonna create a new class now.
We're gonna call this one allowable child modifiers.
(typing)
Okay, so there's our code.
All right, so firstly you can see here.
We've got an animal class with four attributes, again,
each with a different access modifier.
And it also has toString method there
which prints out information about the animal.
Looking down a little bit further here,
we've got a dog class as well
that that extends the animal class
and declares the same four attributes
as its parents but with more
or less restrictive access modifiers.
So you can see in the type here, type was private on animal.
We're declaring it public here.
So this is obviously less restrictive hiding.
The case of owner.
Owner was packaged private on animal.
We're declaring it here protected
so its less restrictive hiding.
For breed, breed was protected on animal.
We're declaring it as packaged private here, by default,
by not specifying an access modifier.
Packaged private is more restrictive hiding than protected.
And lastly, we're setting name to private
and name was public on animal.
We're declaring it private here,
which means it's more restricted.
Okay, so you can see we've got a constructor there and all,
so a toString method.
And then we got our allowable child modifiers class there,
so you can see it's creating instantiated new versions
of both classes, both animal and dog,
and printing out the results.
So let's run this.
And you can see that that's valid.
The code works fine, verifying that access modifiers
for attributes already defined on a parent,
can be more or less restrictive.
But to note also that even though we specified
all the dog's attributes,
executing toString as we're doing on line 65,
it doesn't print them and that's because the toString method
calls the toString method of the parent
which itself has no knowledge of the attributes
to find on the child, even if they have the same name.
You can see that you can print them though,
with the exception of the name attribute,
which is private for the dog class.
All right, so let's continue on with this.
Let's try assigning the pug to the animal attribute
and see what happens.
So I'm adding this code here at the bottom
of the main method in allowable child modifiers.
(typing)
So you can see here that we can print the name,
but not the type.
And if we hover over type,
type has private access in animal.
Let's comment that out and run it.
So although you were able
to access parent name attribute and owner breed,
you kind of actually access the child's attributes here.
This structure seems to flow in the face
of the features you generally desire from inheritance,
but there are valid reasons for doing so in many cases
which is why it's allowable.
All right, so next, let's move on
and see if methods are the same with access modifiers.
So we're gonna create a new class here.
(typing)
We'll call this one allowable override modifiers.
Okay, there's our code.
So you can see firstly, we've got an employee class there
that's got four methods.
And each method has a different access modifier.
So moving on down there,
we've also got a method there, blog,
which has protected access and calls to private method.
So moving on down, we've also got boss class here
and that extends the employee class
and there are also overrides
two of the employee class methods,
the public one and the protected one.
The boss class makes the private method public
and the package method protected
making the methods less restrictive.
So moving down, we've also got
our allowable override modifiers class, main method there,
instantiating objects of employee and boss,
and printing the results of calling various methods.
So let's run this.
So as you can see,
an employee can make a public statement,
an employee can make a protected statement,
an employee can make a package statement,
an employee can make a private statement,
but only the employee can make it public
through other means.
And a boss's packaged speech can be shared
with his children as well now.
A boss's private statements can be made public.
So we didn't try restricting access though,
so let's do that now.
So I'm gonna add a couple more methods now
to the boss class.
So there's our boss class.
Let's add a couple of methods as I mentioned.
And you can see that by doing that,
immediately we've got compile errors for both methods.
The problem here is that you can't make methods
more restrictive on the child or subclass.
Extending a class implies effectively,
you're gonna be adding functionality to it.
By trying to restrict access on methods,
you are attempting the opposite.
In fact, limiting the functionality of a parent class,
which is not permissible.
The parent class created a contract at a public
and or package or protected level,
and any class extending it cannot disregard
or override that contract.
So let's comment out those two methods.
(typing)
So the example we just talked about
demonstrated two examples where you were restricted
from using one of the four access modifiers.
So this chart tries to show you all the cases
where a particular access modifier is not allowed.
So firstly, looking at the top level elements,
class, interface, and enum, protected is not allowed,
private is not allowed,
and what no modifier means is package.
Overriding a public method of a parent class,
protected's not allowed, no modifier's not allowed,
and private's not allowed.
And again, no modifier means package.
Next, we've got overriding a protected method
of a parent class, no modifier is not allowed,
either is private.
Overriding a package method of a parent class,
private is not allowed.
Abstract methods, private's not allowed.
Interface methods, protected is not allowed
and in terms of private,
the method must be implemented if private's used.
And the note there that what no modifier means
is public as of Java 8.
Interface attributes, protected is not allowed
and private is not allowed
and no modifier means public as of Java 8.
Enum constants, no modifier can be specified
and it always defaults to public,
public and protected as well as private are all not allowed
and no modifier means public.
And finally enum constructors, public and protected
are both not allowed.
Private is redundant if it's used
and what no modifier means is private.
All right, so we've now reviewed the access modifiers,
their meaning, and their use for class attributes
and methods as well as restrictions
on their use in some cases.
The next video, I wanna explore these concepts
a little bit more, preparing you to look
for unexpected scenarios in code samples
on an exam question.
See you in the next video.